Story Structure 106: Five Minute Pilots
By Dan Harmon

When I talk about "story structure" I'm talking about something very scientific, like "geometry." Your story could have "perfect" structure but that won't make it a perfect piece of entertainment. Example: "Once upon a time, there was a thirsty man on a couch. He got up off the couch, went to his kitchen, searched through his refrigerator, found a soda, drank it, and returned to his couch, thirst quenched." That was "perfect story structure." On the other hand, the story sucked.

The thing about Channel 101 that makes it really easy to analyze structure in action: The five minute time limit. That's 300 seconds, 75 seconds per story quarter, 37.5 per step.

Steps:
1. "You" - who are we? By the end of the first 37 seconds, we'd really like to know.
2. "Need" - something is wrong, the world is out of balance. Campbell phrases: Call to Adventure, Refusal of the Call, Supernatural Aid.
3. "Go" - the situation changes. Campbell phrase: Crossing of the Threshold. Syd Field phrase: Plot Point 1.
4. "Search" - adapting, experimenting, getting shit together. Campbell phrases: Belly of the Whale, Road of Trials. Vogler phrase: Friends, Enemies and Allies.
5. "Find" - the need from step 2 is fulfilled. Campbell phrase: Meeting with the Goddess. Syd Field phrase: mid-point. Vogler phrase: Approach to the Innermost Cave.
6. "Take" - the hardest part. The price of the journey. Campbell phrases: Atonement with the Father, Death and Resurrection, Apotheosis. Syd Field phrase: plot point 2.
7. "Return" - It's not a journey if you never come back. Campbell phrases: Magic Flight, Rescue from Without, Crossing of the Return Threshold.
8. "Change" - The "you" from step 1 is in charge of their situation again, but has now become a situation-changer. Campbell phrases: Master of Both Worlds, Freedom to Live.

Timing breakdown (for a 5-minute pilot):
- 1:15 for steps 1-3: Get audience to identify with someone, give them a need, start changing circumstances.
- 1:15 for steps 3-5 (or step 4): Deal with new circumstances, find what was needed.
- 1:15 for steps 5-7 (or step 6): Pay the price, start heading back.
- 1:15 for step 8: Show how original circumstances have changed.

In TV (including Channel 101), that last quarter is a good time to make it clear you've got a series in mind.

FAQ:
Q: Why do stories have to follow this structure?
A: It's not that stories have to, it's that without some semblance of this structure, it's not recognizable as a story. There are 8 steps to "drawing" a universally recognizable story.

Q: Why would a human being recognize certain things as stories?
A: Our survival as individuals and communities is dependent on recognizing the edible, nutritious ones.

Q: Some of my favorite movies fly in the face of your story model.
A: If it's really your favorite movie, I absolutely guarantee you it's structured at least somewhat in accordance with this model. I'm not saying "good guys and bad guys," I'm saying "protagonist descending and returning."

Q: If this stuff is instinctive, why does it have to be taught?
A: Because we don't live in the real world anymore. We are not in tune with our instincts.
