Story Structure 104: The Juicy Details
By Dan Harmon

Joseph Campbell was a comparative mythologist, not a corny screenwriting guru. Nevertheless, here is where Dan Harmon feels that the chapters of Campbell's famous "monomyth" or "hero's journey" would fall if forced into his circle.

Step 1: "You" - ESTABLISH A PROTAGONIST
The audience is floating freely, like a ghost, until you give them a place to land. The easiest thing to do is fade in on a character that always does what the audience would do.

Step 2: "Need" - SOMETHING AIN'T QUITE RIGHT
The roller coaster car heads up the first hill. Something is off balance in the universe. This is where a call to adventure could come in. Frequently the protagonist "refuses the call."

Step 3: "Go" - CROSSING THE THRESHOLD
Figure out what your "movie poster" is. What would you advertise? Everything on the bottom half of the circle is a "special world." Everything above is the "ordinary world."

Step 4: "Search" - THE ROAD OF TRIALS
Christopher Vogler calls this "friends, enemies and allies." Hack producers call it the "training phase." Campbell uses "The Road of Trials." The protagonist has been thrown into the water and now it's sink or swim. The purpose: divesting the hero of neuroses, stripping him of fear and desire.

Step 5: "Find" - MEETING WITH THE GODDESS
Syd Field calls this "the mid point." This is a very special pivot point at the very bottom of the circle. This is where the universe's natural tendency to pull your protagonist downward has done its job. A time for major revelations and total vulnerability. Also another threshold - everything past this point will take a different direction (upward). Movement beyond 5 becomes the protagonist's volition.

Step 6: "Take" - MEET YOUR MAKER
Just as 1 and 5 are very maternal/feminine/vulnerable moments, 2 and 6 are very paternal/masculine/active moments. There are major consequences. In a good action movie, this is where our guy simply gets his ass kicked. The road back up prepares you to rejoin the ordinary world. This is the "Atonement with the Father." When you realize something is more important than YOU, you gain full control over your destiny.

Step 7: "Return" - BRINGING IT HOME
For some characters this is as easy as hugging the scarecrow goodbye. For others, "Rescue from Without" or "The Magic Flight." The denizens of the deep can't have people sauntering out of the basement.

Step 8: "Change" - MASTER OF BOTH WORLDS
The protagonist is now a world-altering ninja. They have been to the strange place, adapted to it, discovered true power and now they are back where they started, forever changed and forever capable of creating change. One really neat trick is to remind the audience that the reason the protagonist is capable of such behavior is because of what happened down below (step 4).
