Story Structure 102: Pure, Boring Theory
By Dan Harmon

This isn't a tutorial. It's just a bunch of theory. Why this ritual of descent and return? Why does a story have to contain certain elements, in a certain order, before the audience will even recognize it as a story? Because our society, each human mind within it and all of life itself has a rhythm, and when you play in that rhythm, it resonates.

THE RHYTHM OF BIOLOGY

The universe around us is dying, moving from a state of high energy to low. On Earth, however, things tend to move in a contrary direction. Eggs turn into chickens. People turn into more people. Flesh heals, stupid becomes smarter. Through death: this planetwide creature known as "Life on Earth" has been able to grow and thrive through an evolutionary arms race between the various parts of itself. The more advanced parts of life EAT the less advanced parts, thereby becoming more plentiful until a more advanced part consumes it. Death, to life itself unconsciously, is absolutely essential - 50% of how shit gets done.

THE RHYTHM OF PSYCHOLOGY

Your mind is a home, with an upstairs and a downstairs. Upstairs, in your consciousness, things are well-lit and regularly swept. Downstairs, it is older, darker and much, much freakier. We call this basement the unconscious mind. Your pleasure, your sanity and even your life depend on occasional round trips. You've got to change the fuses, grab the Christmas ornaments, clean the litter box. To the extent that we keep the basement door sealed, the entire home becomes unstable. The creatures downstairs get louder and the guy upstairs (your ego) tries to cover the noise with neurotic behavior. This is the rhythm of psychology: Conscious-unconscious-conscious-unconscious-etc.

THE RHYTHM OF SOCIETY

Societies are basically macrocosms (big versions) of people, only instead of "consciousness," a society's upstairs is "order," and its basement is "chaos." Whereas the health of an individual depends on the ego's regular descent and return to and from the unconscious, a society's longevity depends on actual people journeying into the unknown and returning with ideas. Societies are macrocosms of people in another way: Eventually, they die. There is competition between different societies. The losers are eaten and the winners reproduce. Like people, societies become neurotic and can eventually break down when they make the mistake of thinking the downstairs shouldn't exist. The rhythm of society: Order-chaos-order-chaos-etc.

RESONANCE

Now you understand that all life, including the human mind and the communities we create, marches to the same, very specific beat. If your story also marches to this beat - whether your story is the great American novel or a fart joke - it will resonate. It will send your audience's ego on a brief trip to the unconscious and back. Your audience has an instinctive taste for that, and they're going to say "yum."
